---
Pr-id: Networked Content Analysis: The Case of Climate Change
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 31
Type: Introduction
Book-type: Dissertation
Dissertation item: Chapter
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: 1. Introduction
Article-status: accepted
Author: Sabine Niederer
Rights: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
...

# 1. Introduction

This book has its origins in a project developed during the Digital
Methods Summer School of 2007, the first annual summer program on
methods and tools for social research with the web at the University of
Amsterdam, titled ‘New Objects of Study’. One week of the summer school
was dedicated to ‘Controversy Mapping - Citizen Equipment for
Second-degree Objectivity’ and the keynote speaker was the famous
sociologist and philosopher Bruno Latour.[^1] Via Skype, Latour provided
an introduction to the mapping of controversies, based on the
educational program he had developed at Sciences Po in Paris.[^2] He
started by outlining how to define and detect a ‘good’ controversy. A
controversy is a ‘shared uncertainty about facts’, that manifests
publicly through a range of attitudes. Latour includes consensus and
agreement among the attitudes surrounding a controversy, and considers
consensus an extreme moment in a controversy when actors abandon the
controversy or agree.

Controversies can form and develop through hot arguments or cool
disputes, depending on their intensity and the relative numbers of
positions in disagreement over certain time periods. There is no such
thing as a solid or fixed state of any controversy, or, for that matter,
of consensus. Consequential to this temporal definition and its
appropriateness to scholars’ ongoing relation to controversy as a
*research object,* and as a specific kind of *research* *practice,*
Latour suggested that researchers should best be prepared to jump right
into the middle of a controversy and describe what they encounter there.
A ‘good' controversy (i.e., a controversy most suitable for analysis)
takes place across heterogeneous sources (e.g., academic journals,
newspapers), and includes people from different disciplines. This range
of actors can be studied through their specific vocabulary (the
so-called *actor language*). It matters significantly in approaching the
research of a controversy as to whether it is ‘live,' past or present,
and how many people are involved (and how many of them are scientists).
One should beware that some controversies may be too big to research,
involve too many actors, or too many points of contestation (the example
Latour gave here was that of genetic manipulation). In such cases, it is
best to choose a sub-controversy from a larger one. Furthermore, Latour
stressed that researchers should describe all these dynamics of a
controversy *without translating* what they observe into a more common
or analytically familiar language. Steering clear of predefined keywords
and categories enables researchers to better ‘follow the actors’ and log
actors’ language, connections, and formats (Latour, 2007).[^3]

In Latour’s approach, the actors of a controversy may be found at a
specific event or gathering, in a collection of writings, an e-mail
exchange, and so on. For my first experiment with a controversy mapping
research practice, which I conducted with Esther Weltevrede, we looked
at animals most frequently depicted and mentioned in the climate change
debate on the web.[^4] Looking at three different online spaces: the
news (accessed through Google News), the web (accessed through Google
Web Search) and the blogosphere (accessed through Technorati, the
dominant blogosphere search engine at the time), we created word and
image clouds of those animals resonating most in the climate change
debate. These ‘issue animal’ hierarchies proved distinct per space, and
this was the case in the textual as well as in the image analysis. The
web gave attention to a wide variety of endangered species, giving way
to those affected by global warming as well as global cooling. The News
favorited the polar bear, and also presented a new animal: the cow,
which is not so much affected by global warming but one of the causes,
as cows emit methane. The blogosphere showed a strong preference for the
polar bear too. But a closer look at the actual imagery revealed that
many polar bear images were of people dressed up as polar animals during
activist protests. This also explained the appearance of the dogs in the
data set: the activists’ pets taken along to protests. The study pointed
out that each online content space had its own hierarchies and needed
research approaches adapted to its specificities, a finding that was
worth exploring further.

## Climate Change as a Globally Encountered Controversy

During the summer school of 2008, I chose to pursue the study of the
climate change controversy further . In March of the same year, the
Heartland Institute, a Chicago-based conservative public policy
think-tank, had organized the first international conference of climate
change skepticism. The conference was titled *Global Warming Is Not a
Crisis!*, and featured event elements common to any scientific event:
seemingly esteemed keynote speakers, parallel sessions, and online
proceedings.[^5] The conference website stated that over 200 scientists
from leading universities had participated in the event. For this
controversy mapping exercise, I partnered with Andrei Mogoutov, the
developer of a software tool for ‘scientometric analysis’ called
ReseauLu, to examine the scientific publishing and citation networks of
prominent speakers at this event.[^6][^7]

Our first query related to the apparent eventfulness of the inaugural
Heartland conference. We wanted to know whether the scientific research
and publication ‘profiles’ of climate skeptics were different from the
profiles of non-skeptical climate scientists. More specifically, were
the skeptics, beyond this specific conference, co-participants in a
broader scientific community dedicated to climate science? Or was it
more accurate to understand them as a separate or differently networked
or trained community (or on their way to becoming this), as the
Heartland conference appeared to propose? In addition to this
scientometric analysis, together with another summer school participant
Bram Nijhof, I also *followed* the conference actors through to their
personal websites to see whether these scientists wrote skeptical
articles on topics *other* than climate change. This second research
question is somewhat related to the first, and also straightforward:
Should these actors best be considered as professional *climate science*
experts that happened to be skeptical about specific findings or
projections of climate change science data*?* Or were they skeptics in
relationship to various controversies *as such*—writing critically or
presenting as skeptics on a variety of subjects? Lastly, with Nijhof, I
analyzed the hyperlinking behavior of these actors and their resonance
within the top search engine results for the query of ‘climate
change’.[^8] Upon discovering in these studies that the most prominent
climate actors were skeptics first and foremost (as discussed in detail
in chapter 3), this geared me towards further studies of the controversy
and its actors and ultimately led to the formulation of this book
project.

## Conducting National Analyses

In 2010, I was contacted by Denis Delbecq, a French climate journalist
writing a dossier of several long-form articles about climate skepticism
for the French environmental journal *Terra Eco*. Delbecq had come
across my analysis of the Heartland actors on the
mappingcontroversies.net platform and expressed interest in a similar
collaboration with him that would apply these methods to an analysis of
French climate science actors. He provided a list of prominent climate
scientists (both climate skeptics and non-skeptics), including names of
individuals and representative organizations. We used this data to
conduct both hyperlink analysis (looking at the hyperlinks from the
actors’ websites) and resonance analysis (querying the prominence of
these actors in the Google.fr search results for the query ‘changement
climatique’). Our results were published in *EcoTerra* and on Delbecq’s
blog, and resulted in the outing of a famous French skeptic, who had
until then operated under a pseudonym.[^9][^10]

Soon after, in October 2011, the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences (KNAW)
published a report titled ‘Climate Change: Science and Debate’, aiming
to articulate the current state of global climate science by delineating
topics of consensus from those of controversy.[^11] In response to these
developments in the Netherlands, I collected a list of non-skeptical
actors from the contributors to the KNAW report, and a second list from
the line-up of a skeptical gathering that was organized at Nieuwspoort
in the Hague in critical response to the KNAW report, to conduct an
analysis of Dutch climate skepticism similar to that of the French.[^12]
This made it possible to start to compare the two national situations.
The Dutch study is discussed in detail in Chapter 3.

It was at this point that I found myself in the very midst of the
controversy I was invested in researching, arguably in full accordance
with Latour's directive that researchers jump straight into the middle
of their controversy object as it unfolds. Following the publication of
my work on these national climate change debates, Dutch skeptics,
perhaps prompted by media monitoring tools of their own, started
e-mailing me and including other scholars in their communications to me
in cc (the ‘carbon copy' setting in email). In one email, I was kindly
asked for a headshot, so this person could identify me on his blog along
with his review of my article. Another email described as ‘hurtful' my
linking of Dutch skeptics' work to research by Oreskes and others that
discussed the financial ties of skeptics to fossil fuel and other
sponsoring industries. Still, others wrote to ask why I had not just
contacted them directly to learn the ‘truth' about climate change, or
posed my queries directly to them regarding their specific
methodological approaches and tactics, assumedly to bypass the public
nature and impact of my research findings. Somewhat overwhelmed by these
direct responses but also by their tone, I decided not to write back at
this time.[^13][^14] I wanted to continue my research without getting to
know the actors personally and interfering with my ‘objects of study,’
given that observational distance is (also) necessary for both of the
approaches which I will introduce later in this chapter, namely ‘content
analysis’ and ‘digital methods,’ to keep their status as *non-intrusive*
methods.

## Formulating the Case Studies

As I further developed my research on the climate controversy on the
web, I also sought the most suitable means to study a controversy of
this nature that has no single communication channel but takes place
across online platforms, resonating not only in mass media but also in
search engine results, Wikipedia, Twitter and beyond. Important to note
here is that these platforms have grown exponentially in the period of
2008 and 2015, the time during which I studied the debate, but that
their status or role in controversies has never been systematically
examined. Furthermore, during the same period, traditional mass media
have had many struggles but have not disappeared. Rather, they have
become part of, folded into, and entangled with the platforms and
sources encountered when analyzing controversies through networked
content. I considered that in order to understand specific
controversies, as well as methods for the analysis of networked content
through which they travel, media studies research would benefit from a
deeper knowledge of the function or position that online platforms have
in a controversy, and their entanglement with traditional mass media
content. Hence, I decided to formulate case studies that could capture
the climate change debates flowing through and across these online
platforms.

To map and analyze the state and resonance of climate change actors and
discourses through medium-specific digital methods, I included the use
of websites through hyperlink analysis and search engine results,
Wikipedia through interlinked articles and Twitter through its hashtags.
Thus, my platform-specific case studies make use of different
methodological approaches, taking the research outlook from controversy
analysis and tools and methods developed in digital methods in order to
further attune content analysis to networked digital media content. In
the next section, I will address this research outlook provided by
controversy analysis and very briefly discuss its roots in ‘science and
technology studies’, before I formulate my main thesis and outline the
case studies.

## Traditions in Controversy Analysis

Controversy analysis, as previously mentioned, originated in science and
technology studies (STS), and focuses especially on *scientific*
controversies. Scientific controversies are said to ‘destabilize’ a
system or convention of scientific truth claims, and in doing so reveal
underlying dynamics of science and technology and their relations with a
wider society that under normal circumstances tend to remain
hidden.[^15] STS scholars Trevor Pinch and Christine Leuenberger
describe four influential approaches, which partly overlap
chronologically, within STS-informed controversy analysis.[^16] Firstly,
the ‘Priority Dispute studies’ problematize claims towards who was the
first scientist to make a particular scientific discovery. A second
approach looks at the negative impacts — real or potential — of
scientific and technological innovations (consider for example the
political, social and ecological aspects of nuclear energy and genetic
modification). A third key area of STS, as Pinch and Leuenberger note,
is the Sociology of Scientific Knowledge (SSK), which emerged in the
1970s and operationalized the ideal of ‘symmetry’ to urge social
researchers to ‘use the same explanatory resources to explain both
successful and unsuccessful knowledge claims’.[^17] This principle can
be applied especially well to scientific controversies, where different
scientists each claim to present the truth and to refute the research
methodology, argumentation, or outcomes of other(s). Symmetrical
analysis enables the researchers of a controversy to study both (or all)
sides of the story, including the scientific claims made by actors
internal to the controversy object, by using ‘the same sorts of
sociological resources’.[^18] Fourthly, Pinch and Leuenberger identify
‘modern science and technology studies’ that build heavily on SSK to
regard controversies as ‘integral to many features of scientific and
technological practice and dissemination’.[^19]

While STS has a strong tradition and methodological framework to study
scientific controversies, it does not explicitly outline or champion
specific digital methods for studying the digitally networked aspects of
scientific knowledge communities. As the climate debate is not limited
to offline media but also manifests itself across web platforms, there
is a direct need for further methodological specificity. To analyze
online networked content as part of a scientific (or other) controversy,
we need to recognize the elaborate socio-technical formations—and
transformations—of controversies in online networked content that impact
the work and communities of scientific (and extra-scientific)
truth-claims. Two of the schools of thought and practice I build my
research techniques upon at this point, controversy analysis (as
developed in education at Sciences Po, Paris) and ‘issue mapping’ (as
developed by the Digital Methods Initiative at the University of
Amsterdam) offer digital means of controversy analysis from similar
scholarly traditions but with a distinct angle.[^20] While the Parisian
school stems from STS and operationalizes Actor-Network Theory to zoom
in on a *controversy*, the Amsterdam approach builds on science and
technology studies to track *issues* more broadly, be they controversial
or not.[^21][^22][^23][^24][^25]

This book makes integrative use of controversy analysis as well as
digital methods (and tools) for issue mapping to conduct an analysis of
the climate controversy across online platforms. As I outline in detail
in the next chapter, a highly relevant research technique for both
qualitative and quantitative analyses of mediated content precedes my
work here, developed to study media content in the field of
communication science under the name of ‘content analysis’. Content
analysis was incepted to study given or demarcated bodies of content
(often referred to as ‘texts’ but not limited to that format), to
analyze both formal features (e.g. the shot lengths of a television
show, or the column widths and word counts of a printed text, etc.) and
‘textual’ meanings (broadly defined) including themes, tropes, recurring
topics and terms, all in order to make inferences about societal
perceptions, cultural change, and trends in public opinion. A famous
pre-web longitudinal content analysis study referenced in the scholarly
literature is the *Cultural Indicators* program (of the 60s through 90s)
by George Gerbner et al. that used weeklong aggregations of the
prime-time television footage to record all representations of violence
and construct ‘violence profiles,' for this material. These
representations were then interpreted and turned into ‘cultural
indicators,' which referred both to trends in network television's
dramatic content and to viewer conceptions of social reality.[^26][^27]
Content analysis has since been described as ‘indigenous to
communication research and \[as\] potentially one of the most important
research techniques in the social sciences’.[^28]

It is essential to emphasize that I understand content analysis to have
always been inclusive of *potentially* all content types. By taking mass
media as its most prominent raw data source, however, this kind of
scholarship tended to be ‘dominated by content analyses of newspapers,
magazines, books, \[radio\] broadcasts, films, comics, and television
programming’ as one of its key scholars, Klaus Krippendorf pointed
out.[^29] Krippendorf, who I take to be centrally informative for my own
work, has made explicit since content analysis’ earliest methodological
formation that (more or less publicly communicated) data of any kind
could potentially be studied through content analysis. He mentions
varieties of media ‘content’ as diverse as ‘personal letters, children's
talk, disarmament negotiations, witness accounts in courts, audiovisual
records of therapeutic sessions, answers to open-ended interview
questions, and computer conferences’, and even ‘postage stamps, motifs
on ancient pottery, speech disturbances, the wear and tear of books, and
dreams’. More theoretically, as a major proponent and methodological
innovator of this field of media research, Krippendorff’s assertion that
‘anything that occurs in sufficient numbers and has reasonably stable
meanings for a specific group of people may be subjected to content
analysis’, is a key driver of my own development of ‘networked content
analysis’.[^30]

If, in practice, content analysis has mostly focused on neatly
demarcated sets of texts or other media materials such as television
shows, the specificity, dynamism, and networked nature of digital media
content poses a myriad of new methodological challenges and
opportunities to contemporary content analysts. Digital media content
can be published or created on the World Wide Web, and enriched with
opportunities for navigation and interaction. It can be networked by
in-text hyperlinks (creating a so-called ‘hypertext’), or by suggestions
of related articles or other recommendation systems, or pulled into
social media by prevalent ‘Like’ and ‘Share’ buttons on websites, urging
users to link content to their own user profiles.[^31] Online content is
*networked*. It is dynamic rather than stable; it often changes over
time or moves from the front page to the archive. Social media further
scatters content, offering a ‘live feed’ that is referred to as the
qualitative and quantitative *real-timeness* of social media data, the
content of which can be linked to, copied onto other networks, and
archived across the (social) web.[^32] These social media platforms each
format, rank, and serve content in unique ways, which makes it important
to start developing adaptive, digital methods that are attuned to the
diverse specificities of these platforms.

Content analysis of such networked content may ask where the ‘content’
that is under analysis ends if all content is (more and less)
meaningfully hyperlinked to other related content on other web pages.
Indeed, how is it possible to demarcate a website? Is it
methodologically appropriate to apply the techniques of content analysis
that worked for printed newspapers like the *New York Times* or *The
Guardian*, and for television formats such as *CNN* or *Al Jazeera*, to
online news sites like www.nytimes.com and www.guardian.co.uk, let alone
to a content search engine and aggregator like Google News? The answers
to these questions as they have been offered by content analysis
scholars throughout different phases in the history of the web are
described extensively in Chapter 2, and can be summed up as broadly
presenting two distinct approaches. The first, as described by McMillan,
argues for standardization of methods towards the analysis of web
content, which McMillan characterizes as a ‘moving target’.[^33] A
second approach is formulated by Herring in response to McMillan, who
proposes to combine traditional content analysis techniques with
methodologies from disciplines such as linguistics and sociology to
offer a more workable response to the challenges offered by ‘new online
media’.[^34]

While these two approaches each offer ways forward for the analysis of
web content, they are not concerned with the vast differences between
different web platforms—the specific technicalities of which contribute
significantly to the meaning of networked content. It is important to
note that web content currently exists in and through the platforms and
engines that produce it, which means a clean separation of content from
its carrier is no longer feasible.[^35] Different web platforms and
search engines each carry their own (often visually undisclosed) formats
and formatting; they have their own scenarios of use and their own terms
of service; further, they also output their own results and rankings.
Consider the example of Wikipedia, the collaboratively written
encyclopedia project on a wiki, where each article has a page, sometimes
other language versions, a discussion page, user statistics, a ‘history'
or archive of all previous versions of the article, all of which can be
used in comparison with the current version of the article, as bots at
work continue to edit text and undo vandalism. Differently for Twitter,
the social network slash micro-blogging tool, user-broadcasted messages
are bound by a limit of 140 characters per Tweet. They can include
images, links to URLs, tags of other users (whether directly connected
as ‘followers' or not), and hashtags to network and aggregate individual
content around specific events, issues, opinions, and themes. Content
can include retweets of someone else's message (in several distinct
ways, as described by Bruns and Burgess), which generates yet another
layer to the networking of content.[^36][^37] These specificities of how
platforms and engines serve, format, redistribute, and essentially
co-produce content is what I refer to as the *technicity* of content.

## Central Thesis: Accounting for Technicity

Controversy mapping, digital methods, and content analysis, in
combination, offer means to study a controversy on the web that include
this factor of technicity in the analysis of networked content. In this
research, I will put forward such methods and techniques that take as
their point of departure that the medium of the web now not only serves
but also co-produces online content. The novel challenges posed by the
dynamics of web content does not mean we have to dispose of content
analysis altogether. On the contrary, as content analysis from the
outset has been potentially inclusive of all varieties of content in and
across contexts, its methods need to be amended only slightly — building
on digital methods and controversy analysis — to suit the technicity of
web content. I will argue that content analysis in its earliest form
still offers model methods and approaches that, with appropriate
amendments for the digital age, can be updated to stand as a strong
methodological ground for what I name and develop here as ‘networked
content analysis’.

The central thesis of this study is that different web platforms and
engines serve content with different technicities, which I argue are a
crucial aspect of the object of study (i.e., web content) and should,
therefore, be included in the analysis.[^38][^39][^40][^41] How can
these insights from digital methods inform the application of content
analysis to web content? As I am persistently emphasizing, developing
means of collecting and analyzing digital media content across platforms
starts with the problematic realization that each platform or engine has
its own *technicity* and thus requires specific methods and analytical
tools. To retain the strengths of content analysis for contemporary
humanities and social research, and further develop techniques that
better adapt to the specificities of networked content, the question
central to this book is: how can technicity be meaningfully included in
the analysis of online content?

In operationalizing this inclusive approach, I analyze the content of
specific platforms alongside their technicity, for example, the user's
access to read/write/link/archive capabilities, and identify the queries
or tools that are necessary to demarcate and analyze content relevant to
controversy objects that traverse these specific websites and platforms.
Neither controversy analysis nor content analysis offers
platform-specific techniques, which is why the addition of digital
methods and tools is necessary for the analysis of such an
interdisciplinary and popular, volatile public debate that is so widely
distributed across platforms. In this way, I conduct what I consider to
be useful, propositional forms, and methods of networked content
analysis towards the study of the climate change debate online.

## Networked Content Analysis of the Climate Debate

Climate change is defined by the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCC) as the ‘change of climate which is attributed
directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of
the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate
variability observed over comparable time periods’.[^42] The UNFCC
distinguishes between human-attributed climate change and natural
climate variability, a complex distinction that lies at the core of what
is one of the most contentious and world-changing controversy objects of
our time. There are clearly many reasons that I could propose for
choosing to work with this complex issue in my development of networked
content analysis methods. Quite apart from the political and scientific
urgency accorded to this debate, as a new media researcher, I am
particularly interested in the fact that to study climate change as a
controversy object is to engage with a wide variety of (offline and
online) media and knowledge spaces. Climate change remains on the agenda
of NGOs and governments alike. Scholars have named it amongst the
greatest threats (or ‘risks,’ to speak with Ulrich Beck) of our times
and as a crisis of formidable scale.[^43][^44] This book does not
contribute to climate *science* but instead focuses entirely on
developing a networked content analysis of the climate controversy as it
is specifically mediated and transformed by online platforms and actors,
in order to gain insight in how such controversial debates evolve and
how certain actors and viewpoints may resonate more forcefully than
others. Accordingly, the next section will introduce prior studies in
climate-related content analysis by Anthony Downs, building beyond the
work that opened this introduction.

Before reappraising Downs, it is necessary to specify further my
research outlook. Where my central concern here is to develop means to
include technicity in the analysis of networked content, I am dealing
with the specificity of the question by applying it to the topic of web
content on climate change. Looking at how technicity can be included in
the analysis of networked climate change content, I take to three online
platforms that each represent a different web culture, if you will. The
web as accessed through the search engine Google is for many Internet
users the main point of access to web content.[^45] Twitter is one of
the most prominent social platforms online, with its content available
through an API. Wikipedia is the most-used online equivalent of an
encyclopedia. As climate change is present across distinct sites of
knowledge sharing, discussion and dissemination (science, news, popular
media) it can be studied across platforms and analyzed in terms of: the
variety and prominence of actors and sources (Google); the online
dynamics of knowledge production (Wikipedia); and the sub-issues of
climate change as shared online (Twitter).

Building upon the strengths of existing content analysis projects, my
formulation of networked content analysis asks what may be learned from
previous applications of content analysis. How has content analysis been
amended since its very first application to web-based content? In
applying networked content analysis to online climate change content, I
will address how the issue of climate change can be studied there (via
Google/Wikipedia/Twitter) and identify the specific technicities of such
content. Given that the study of climate change across media has already
been strongly attended to in earlier content analysis studies, I briefly
discuss this research pre-history and its relevance to my own work in
the next section.

## The Climate Change Debate as an Object of Study

Climate change as an issue has, in fact, been attended to with
fine-grained content analysis methods since the early seventies. In his
article *Up and Down with Ecology: the “Issue Attention Cycle”,* Anthony
Downs described how the environment, like any societal issue, is subject
to a rise and fall in public interest. He uses the notion of the ‘issue
attention cycle’ to describe common dynamics in public attention that
occur for ‘most key domestic issues’.[^46] Downs’ articulation of the
issue attention cycle knows five stages: (1) the pre-problem stage, (2)
alarmed discovery and euphoric enthusiasm, (3) realization of the cost
of significant progress, (4) gradual decline of intense public interest
and, lastly, (5) the post-problem stage.[^47] Downs sees the ‘remarkably
widespread upsurge of interest in the quality of our environment’ as
involving such an issue attention cycle, in which the ‘change in public
attitudes has been much faster than any changes in the environment
itself’.[^48] Downs’ work has been subjected to strong criticism, mainly
on the linearity assumed by his proposed cycle model, and on the
research’s focus more on mediation as such, over the mediation of this
specific and urgent issue, as described thoroughly by McComas and
Shanahan.[^49] With these qualifications, analysts of media content have
taken up Downs’ approach and further extended its application to
environment-related issues.

In what they refer to as a ‘(de)construction’ of the issue attention
cycle for environmental issues, McComas and Shanahan compare the climate
change news coverage of the major US newspapers, *The New York Times*
and *The Washington Post*, between 1980-1995.[^50] Their research
confirms the cyclical nature of attention to the issue of climate
change, and even recognizes different stages that dialogue with Downs’
own, in which:

> \[T\]he implied danger and consequences of global warming gain more
> prominence on the upswing of newspaper attention, whereas controversy
> among scientists receives greater attention in the maintenance phase.
> The economics of dealing with global warming also receive more
> considerable attention during the maintenance phase and downside of
> the attention cycle.[^51]

Where these researchers stress the importance of the ‘role played by
narratives in driving media attention to environmental issues’, others
have stressed how real-life events (such as extreme weather) are a
crucial catalyst in the garnering of public attention for an issue of
‘celebrity status’.[^52] [^53] A concept that builds on this analytical
approach to issue attention is the ‘news spiral’, which refers to the
phenomenon that once the climate is in the news, this creates a general
upsurge of interest in (and reporting on) other environmental
issues.[^54] The retrieval and analyses of attention and news cycles fit
into the ongoing methods and applications of content analysis at large.

Chapter 2 discusses the early disciplinary formation of content analysis
and develops an approach towards networked content analysis. Content
analysis has a strong history of use in communication science, where
large bodies of text are analyzed for features or (recurring) themes, in
order to identify cultural indicators or make other inferences about the
text. To apply these methods to web content remains a challenging
exercise to researchers of various scholarly disciplines, for, unlike
traditional print media such as newspapers or books, web content is
often dynamic. It is also networked, which poses problems for the
demarcation of the content under study. To grapple with these technical
specificities of web content, researchers either stay close to
traditional content analysis techniques or choose to pull in methods
from other disciplines and seek more extended paradigms of web content
analysis.[^55][^56][^57] In this chapter, I will give an overview of
these strategies preceding my research, and introduce novel means of
networked content analysis that include the technicity of web content as
part of the analysis and repositions content analysis (in the tradition
of Krippendorff) as a medium-specific approach.

In the three case studies that follow this methodological discussion, I
assess the climate change debate on different platforms. As the climate
debate does not only take place across platforms, but also over time,
the studies presented will assess diverse moments in the climate change
debate, ranging from the first skeptical conference of 2008 to the
‘Paris Agreement’ of 2015. The aim of the study is not to present a neat
chronology or timeline of the debate from beginning to end, nor, at the
other extreme, to do away with historical analyses. The point of entry
is less the debate’s transformation over time (or its timing), than its
entangled relation to the platform and its specificities. How can we
amend content analysis to attune to the technicity of networked content,
knowing for instance that on the web, search engines rank content,
websites are hyperlinked, and actors in one issue may also be working on
another issues and publishing about this on their personal websites? And
what does the platform, or the engine, do to the debate?

In Chapter 3, I analyze the networks of climate debate actors using
search engines and scientometric analysis. This chapter uses search
engines (ISI and Google) and hyperlink analysis to research the place
and status of climate skepticism within both climate science itself and
the climate change controversy as it takes place beyond the scientific
literature. Here, the central question is how networked content analysis
can be conducted *through* the web, taking into account the technicity
of search engines. The case study zooms in on climate change actors and
their prominence, as identified by search engines. It asks how the
technical logic of search might be used to measure and compare the
prominence of actors in a specific issue, in this case, by looking at
the resonance of climate change scientists (both skeptical and
non-skeptical) within a demarcated set of websites. Hyperlink analysis
and search engines enable comprehension of the group formation of actors
in the debate and measure their resonance within web sources on the
issue of climate change. Traditional scientometrics paired with digital
methods offer a detailed picture of the status, group formations and
issue commitments of climate change skeptics, and questions whether
their interest lies in skepticism itself or in climate change.

In Chapter 4, I discuss Wikipedia as a socio-technical utility for
climate controversy mapping. The technicity of Wikipedia content makes
it possible to refine further the techniques of networked content
analysis, so as to enable matters of resonance, relational dimensions of
content, actor engagement and controversy management to be studied
within this encyclopedia project. Wikipedia, as a wiki-based
encyclopedia platform, offers various levels of access to information on
article histories and editors, enabling researchers to ‘follow the
actors’ and close-read their positions, references and commitment to a
specific issue. In this case study, I discuss how Wikipedia has been
researched since its launch in 2001, and how dominant research practices
have disregarded some of the crucial technical specificities of
Wikipedia and the production, organization and maintenance of its
content. I then zoom in on more recent controversy analyses, attending
to the technicity of Wikipedia content by looking at discussions on the
talk pages (for the article on Gdańsk/Danzig), and by conducting a
comparative analysis of articles across language versions (for the case
of the Srebrenica massacre). Lastly, I discuss a networked content
analysis of climate change related articles, tracing its networked
content and close reading its actor behavior. I discuss a climate change
article ecology study from 2009 and the development of a Wikipedia
controversy analysis tool developed in 2014 titled ‘Contropedia’. I
propose here to treat Wikipedia as a data-rich site of social research,
through a networked content analysis of climate change articles and
their linkages.

In the final case study of Chapter 5, I conduct a networked content
analysis of climate change-related Twitter messages (or ‘tweets’) to map
the state of the climate change debate online. Here, I analyze Twitter
data to consider four related climate change discourses: adaptation (to
climate change), skepticism (towards the man-made origins and
unprecedentedness of climate change), mitigation (the prevention of
further climate change by minimizing its causes), and conflict (here
taken to mean political unrest relatable to so-called ‘climate change
vulnerability’).[^58] Given climate vulnerability has recently become a
prominent and focalizing discourse within climate change, both in the
scientific literature (as mapped out by the IPCC in 2014) and in news
coverage around climate change, I will zoom in on this issue in more
detail. Recently, new debates concerning climate change research and
modeling have arisen as experts are increasingly drawing connections
between climate vulnerability and human conflict. Major news media
outlets increasingly contribute to circulating an understanding of
climate change vulnerability as a potential factor in social unrest,
including in Syria and Egypt, explaining how drought and water scarcity
may have intensified the Arab Spring. Twitter already has a strong
tradition of being repurposed to study events, uprisings and social
responsiveness to the news.

In this chapter, to study Twitter’s climate content and include its
technicity, I create keyword profiles and additionally zoom in on the
hashtags used within a set of climate change tweets. A co-hashtag
analysis of this set of tweets reveals an ecology of climate
change-related sub-issues illustrating the current state of climate
action and adaptation—a multifarious presence of vulnerability variables
related to data sets on animals, habitats and more, affected by extreme
weather conditions. In attending to a descriptive analysis of sub-issues
within the climate change controversy, which has such complex social
dimensions, this chapter exemplifies how controversy does not end once
consensus on some aspects of the science is publicly secured.

Chapter 6 holds the conclusions, in which I discuss the findings of the
various case studies on two levels: that of the methodological toolbox
of networked content analysis as well as on the level of the controversy
mapping itself, reiterating what the various case studies teach us about
the climate change debate, and gather up implications for the practice
of networked content analysis. Taking the lessons learned from the case
studies on the study of the climate debate with Twitter, Wikipedia, and
Google, I return to Krippendorff to revisit his foundational work and
propose appropriately amended techniques and tools for networked content
analysis. Subsequently, I discuss the challenges for future research. As
the climate controversy plays out on many platforms that, in turn, *pull
in* traditional mass media content, I show how combined and interlinked
findings across platforms provide a more comprehensive mapping of a
multi-platformed issue.

[^1]: See also the summer school’s wiki page:
    https://wiki.digitalmethods.net/Dmi/MappingControversies.

[^2]: B. Latour, 'Mapping Controversies', presented at the Digital
    Methods Summer School, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 2007.

[^3]: Tommaso Venturini, working with Bruno Latour in the Controversy
    Mapping educational and research program of Sciences Po describes
    ‘three commandments of observation’: ‘1. You shall not restrain your
    observation to any single theory or methodology; 2. You shall
    observe from as many viewpoints as possible; 3. You shall listen to
    actors’ voices more than to your own presumptions.’ T. Venturini,
    'Diving in Magma: How to Explore Controversies with Actor-network
    Theory', *Public Understanding of Science* 19.3 (2009): 260.

[^4]: Digital Methods Initiative, 'Issue Image Analysis', 2007,
    https://wiki.digitalmethods.net/Dmi/IssueImageAnalysis.

[^5]: The Heartland Institute, 'First International Conference on
    Climate Change (ICCC-1)', 2008,
    http://climateconferences.heartland.org/iccc1/.

[^6]: Scientometrics uses data sets of scientific publications and
    assesses these through citation analysis. More specifically, a
    scientometric analysis can extend from tracking citational behavior
    and referencing, to understanding these processes as constructing
    norms and rules of scientific writing, to considering how specific
    or groups of texts play out in an inter-referential network of
    influence and authority. P. Wouters, *The Citation Culture*,
    Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam, 1999.

[^7]: See also A. Cambrosio, P. Cottereau, S. Popowycz, A. Mogoutov, and
    T. Vichnevskaia, 'Analysis of Heterogenous Networks: The ReseauLu
    Project', in B. Reber and C. Brossaud (eds.) *Digital Cognitive
    Technologies: Epistemology and the Knowledge Economy*, Hoboken, NJ:
    John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2013.

[^8]: These studies were published on the online research platform
    mappingcontroversies.net (as part of the EU 7th Framework project
    *Macospol*). S. Niederer, 'Climate Change Skeptics in Science',
    2009,
    http://www.mappingcontroversies.net/Home/PlatformClimateChangeSkepticsScience.

[^9]: D. Delbecq, 'A \[F\]rench Climate Skeptic Comes Out: He Is a
    Physicist', *Effets de Terre*, 2010,
    http://effetsdeterre.fr/2010/04/21/a-french-climate-skeptic-comes-out-he-is-a-physicist/.
    D. Delbecq, 'Dossier Climato-sceptiques', *TerraEco* (April 2010):
    50–62.

[^10]: D. Delbecq, and S. Niederer, 'Climatosceptiques et Climatologues,
    Quelle Place sur l’Internet?', 2010,
    http://effetsdeterre.fr/2010/04/12/climatosceptiques-quelle-place-sur-linternet/.

[^11]: KNAW, *Klimaatverandering, Wetenschap en Debat*, Amsterdam:
    Koninklijke Nederlandse Academie van Wetenschappen, 2011,
    https://www.knaw.nl/nl/actueel/publicaties/klimaatverandering-wetenschap-en-debat/@@download/pdf\_file/20101047.pdf.

[^12]: Nieuwspoort is a forum for political debate, situated next to the
    House of Representatives’ building in the city center of The Hague.
    ‘Nieuwspoort’, http://www.nieuwspoort.nl/over-nieuwspoort/.

[^13]: The question of how precisely I was able to label and split these
    actors as either skeptical or non-skeptical climate scientists I
    consider valid. Here, I followed the Latourian logic of there being
    no groups without ‘group holders’ and ‘group talkers’. Bruno Latour,
    *Reassembling the Social*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.

[^14]: Somebody may not be a climate expert in daily life, but when this
    person is one of the editors of a publication on the climate
    controversy and consensus (in the KNAW example), they at that moment
    perform to identify with a ‘group’ of climate experts. Similarly,
    when opposing Dutch climate experts organize an event at Nieuwspoort
    to refute a scientific report as ‘alarmist’, they perform as
    skeptical ‘group makers, group talkers, and group holders’. Latour,
    *Reassembling the Social,* 32.

[^15]: T. Pinch and C. Leuenberger, 'Studying Scientific Controversy
    from the STS Perspective: Concluding Remarks on Panel "Citizen
    Participation and Science and Technology"', in *East Asian Science,
    Technology and Society*, 2006,
    http://fr.curriculumforge.org/TravaillongVincentr?action=AttachFile&do=get&target=Pinch+studying.pdf.

[^16]: Pinch and Leuenberger, 'Studying Scientific Controversy from the
    STS Perspective’, 4.

[^17]: Pinch and Leuenberger, 'Studying Scientific Controversy from the
    STS Perspective’, 12.

[^18]: Pinch and Leuenberger, 'Studying Scientific Controversy from the
    STS Perspective’, 12.

[^19]: Pinch and Leuenberger, 'Studying Scientific Controversy from the
    STS Perspective’, 5.

[^20]: The third of which is content analysis, central to the next
    chapter.

[^21]: N. Marres, 'Why Map Issues? On Controversy Analysis as a Digital
    Method', *Science, Technology & Human Values*, 0162243915574602,
    2015, http://doi.org/10.1177/0162243915574602.

[^22]: T. Venturini, 'Diving in Magma: How to Explore Controversies with
    Actor-network Theory', *Public Understanding of Science* 19.3
    (2009): 258–273.

[^23]: R. Rogers and N. Marres, 'Landscaping Climate Change: A Mapping
    Technique for Understanding Science and Technology Debates on the
    World Wide Web', *Public Understanding of Science* 9.2 (2000):
    141–163.

[^24]: Latour’s *Mapping Controversies* educational program has
    culminated in the Médialab Sciences Po in Paris in 2009, which
    develops digital tools and methods for Controversy Mapping. Sciences
    Po’s approach is ‘interdisciplinary’ and describes its work as
    ‘seeking to apply computational techniques in order to detect,
    analyze and visualize public contestation over topical affairs’.
    Marres, ‘Why Map Issues?’.

[^25]: When analyzing controversy, researchers team up with programmers,
    data analysts, and information designers to create maps that make
    web content *differently* legible for further analysis. In my own
    research practice, I have worked in similar teams associated with
    the University of Amsterdam's Digital Methods Initiative, and
    participated in ‘sprints' as part of the EU-projects MACOSPOL and
    EMAPS, in which we analyzed controversies through web data.

[^26]: G. Gerbner, 'Toward "Cultural Indicators": The Analysis of Mass
    Mediated Public Message Systems', *Educational Technology Research
    and Development* 17.2 (1969): 137–148.

[^27]: G. Gerbner, 'Cultural Indicators: The Case of Violence in
    Television Drama', *The Annals of the American Academy of Political
    and Social Science* 388.1 (1970): 69–81.

[^28]: K. Krippendorff, *Content Analysis: An Introduction to its
    Methodology*, first edition, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications,
    1980.

[^29]: Krippendorff, *Content Analysis,* 404.

[^30]: Krippendorff, *Content Analysis.*

[^31]: C. Gerlitz and A. Helmond, 'The Like Economy: Social Buttons and
    the Data-intensive Web', *New Media & Society*, 2013,
    http://nms.sagepub.com/content/early/2013/02/03/1461444812472322.

[^32]: L. Back, C. Lury, and R. Zimmer, 'Doing Real Time Research:
    Opportunities and Challenges', *National Centre for Research Methods
    (NRCM)*, *Methodological review paper*, 2012,
    http://eprints.ncrm.ac.uk/3157/1/real\_time\_research.pdf.

[^33]: S. McMillan, 'The Microscope and the Moving Target: The Challenge
    of Applying Content Analysis to the World Wide Web', *Journalism and
    Mass Communication Quarterly* 77 (2000): 80–88.

[^34]: S. Herring, 'Web Content Analysis: Expanding the Paradigm', in J.
    Hunsinger et al. (eds) *International Handbook of Internet
    Research*, Dordrecht: Springer, 2010, pp. 233-249.

[^35]: Krippendorf stands out, as I emphasize in Chapter 2, in including
    this fact from the beginning, well before this research method had
    to deal with online networked content.

[^36]: A. Bruns and J.E. Burgess, 'The use of Twitter Hashtags in the
    Formation of Ad Hoc Publics', in *Proceedings of the 6th European
    Consortium for Political Research (ECPR) General Conference 2011*,
    2011, http://eprints.qut.edu.au/46515.

[^37]: A. Helmond, *The Web as Platform: Data Flows in Social Media,*
    Ph.D. Thesis, 19 June 2015, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam.

[^38]: Here it is important to point out that the attention to the
    technicity of content at the core of my research necessitates the
    recognition of the spatial organization and geo-location of content,
    as well as dislocation and censorship, which all problematize the
    very idea of a ‘world wide web' of content assumed to be globally
    available. Internet censorship research has demonstrated how a
    user's geo-location is crucial to the availability of content, as
    served, for instance by the search engine Google. Research that
    critically comes to terms with these local differences in search
    engine results — which can be shown up by using a different language
    version of Google, or with VPN connections that access the web from
    other geo-locations — has been called ‘search as research' by
    Rogers, and presented at international search engine research
    conferences such as the *Society of the Query*. R. Rogers, *Digital
    Methods*, Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press, 2013. R. Deibert, J. Palfrey,
    R. Rohozinski, J. Zittrain, and J.G. Stein, *Access Denied: The
    Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering*, Cambridge, MA:
    MIT Press, 2008.

[^39]: See also: R. König and M. Rasch, eds. *Society of the Query
    Reader: Reflections on Web Search*, Amsterdam: Institute of Network
    Cultures, 2014. What this research underlines is that the web may be
    ‘worldwide’ in its infrastructure, but it is not in its access to
    content.

[^40]: R. Deibert, J. Palfrey, R. Rohozinski, J. Zittrain, and M.
    Haraszti, *Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule
    in Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010.

[^41]: R. Rogers, E. Weltevrede, S. Niederer, and E. Borra, 'National
    Web Studies: The case of Iran', in J. Hartley, J. Burgess and A.
    Bruns (eds) *Blackwell Companion to New Media Dynamics*, Oxford:
    Blackwell, 2013, pp. 142-166.

[^42]: United Nations, 'United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
    Change', 1992,
    https://unfccc.int/files/essential\_background/background\_publications\_htmlpdf/application/pdf/conveng.pdf.

[^43]: U. Beck, *World at Risk*, Cambridge: Polity Press, 2009.

[^44]: B. Latour, 'Waiting for Gaia: Composing the Common World Through
    Arts and Politics', *Equilibri* 16.3 (2012): 515–538.

[^45]: The dominance of Google Web Search has been critically assessed
    by scholars including Carr, Lovink, and Vaidhyanathan. See: N. Carr,
    *The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google*, New
    York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2008. G. Lovink, 'The Society of
    the Query and the Googlisation of Our Lives: A Tribute to Joseph
    Weizenbaum', *Eurozine*, 2008,
    http://www.eurozine.com/articles/2008-09-05-lovink-en.html. S.
    Vaidhyanathan, *The Googlization of Everything: (And Why We Should
    Worry)*, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2011.

[^46]: A. Downs, 'Up and Down with Ecology: The Issue-attention Cycle',
    *The Public Interest* 28 (1972): 38.

[^47]: Downs, ‘Up and Down with Ecology’, 39-40.

[^48]: Downs, ‘Up and Down with Ecology’, 38.

[^49]: K. McComas and J. Shanahan, 'Telling Stories About Global Climate
    Change Measuring the Impact of Narratives on Issue Cycles',
    *Communication Research* 26.1 (1999): 30–57.

[^50]: McComas and Shanahan, ‘Telling Stories About Global Climate
    Change Measuring the Impact of Narratives on Issue Cycles’.

[^51]: McComas and Shanahan, ‘Telling Stories About Global Climate
    Change Measuring the Impact of Narratives on Issue Cycles’, 30.

[^52]: McComas and Shanahan, ‘Telling Stories About Global Climate
    Change Measuring the Impact of Narratives on Issue Cycles’, 33. S.

[^53]: Ungar, 'The Rise and (Relative) Decline of Global Warming as a
    Social Problem', *The Sociological Quarterly* 33.4 (1992): 483–501.

[^54]: M. Djerf-Pierre, 'When Attention Drives Attention: Issue Dynamics
    in Environmental News Reporting Over Five Decades', *European
    Journal of Communication*, 27.3 (2012): 291–304.

[^55]: McMillan, 'The Microscope and the Moving Target'.

[^56]: Herring, 'Web Content Analysis’.

[^57]: C. Weare and W. Lin, 'Content Analysis of the World Wide Web:
    Opportunities and Challenges', *Social Science Computer Review* 18
    (2010): 272–292.

[^58]: In the EMAPS Digital Methods Fall Data Sprint of October 2013, we
    asked whether conflict could be seen as a fourth phase in the
    evolution of the issue of climate change, after skepticism,
    mitigation and adaptation. EMAPS, 'Vulnerability, Resilience and
    Conflict: Mapping Climate Change, Reading Cli-fi', *Electronic Maps
    to Assist Public Science Blog*, 2013,
    http://www.emapsproject.com/blog/archives/2293.
