---
Pr-id: Networked Content Analysis: The Case of Climate Change
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 32
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 03
Article-title: foreword
Article-status: accepted
Author: Klaus Krippendorff
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...

#Foreword

By Klaus Krippendorff

Communication scholarship was born at a time radio and television became a challenge to professional newspaper journalists and the emergence of novel theories of communication. While it borrowed investigative methods from existing disciplines – experiments from psychology, surveys from sociology, ethnography from anthropology, and last if not least took advantage of what the new communication technologies had to offer – it contributed three major methods. One was digitalization, which grew out of information theory and ushered in our developing communication infrastructure. The second was content analysis, the systematic study of what was communicated, largely by the media to the public. And the third was the idea of networks, who talks to whom, and what are the social and individual consequences of complex connections. Sabine Niederer’s Networked Content Analysis draws on all three indigenous contributions of communication scholarship.

From its beginning, content analysis aimed at making unobtrusive inferences from texts to their context of use. Its ability to analyze bodies of texts larger than what any one analyst could read and interpret called for methodological precautions not typical in literary scholarship. In return, it revealed novel insights not available with smaller data: historical trends, comparisons across different sources, and support for theories not recognizable by unaided scholars, as Niederer shows. It was also adopted by numerous other disciplines concerned with phenomena that are constituted in linguistic communication. While the “content” that content analysis claimed to study remained metaphorical, often presented in terms of frequencies, this ambiguity invited statistical accounts not ordinarily encountered by informed readings of texts.

For example, contingency analysis charts the proximities of selected concepts in various communications. Co-occurrences in texts were shown to correlate with authors and readers’ associations, manifest in their ability to recall them easily. Finding patterns of above and below chance contingencies provided a basis for inferences about the conceptual structures of individual authors as well as widely shared political, social, and cultural beliefs. These inferences were basically of a cognitive nature. Search engines vastly expanded the ability to discover co-occurrences in documents with three caveats: Search engines find strings of characters, words or phrases, not logically connected concepts. They are often insensitive of unequal proximities in documents, and when searching larger databases, leave somewhat uncertain what accounts for evident cooccurrences.   

Tracing one authors’ references to other works and theirs to still other works is another example of content analyses pursuing connections, across documents not within them. There are of course numerous reasons for citing other publications, but familiarity with their authors or their ideas underlies all of them. Citation analysis revealed not only a single authors’ literary resources, but following the references of references could reveal how members of a discourse community hang together, the centrality of their individual contributions, where conceptions originate, and how diverse discourses influence each other. Citations are social acts and content analyses of citations offer considerable insights into how largely academic communities are organized and construct their objects. 

Although the origin of the idea of hypertext has been traced to Ludwig Wittgenstein’s (1922) hierarchical system of numbering of comments on propositions and comments on comments in his Tractatus (Stern, 1996), it was not until the 1980s that digital texts enabled readers to click on links within a text to explore related matter, effectively enabling them to browse within a predefined textual universe. Hypertexts overcame the constraint of having to read text in the order it was written. It enabled readers to navigate their own paths through textual, visual, even auditory matter, towards their own intellectual goals. Content analyses of hypertexts had to chart the network of connections between the contexts of each link, a task that became quickly unmanageable without computational aids. Inferences from such networks are neither psychological nor social but have to do with the possible narratives one could extract from hypertexts. 

Evidently, the recognition of networks of connections constructed in processes of analyzing the content of bodies of text has a long history. However, Niederer’s Networked Content Analysis offers a quantum leap into the digital age. 

Her work accepts the methodological premises of content analysis, appreciates its unobtrusive way of creating data, but adds tools and concepts to tackle the complexities of digitally available texts from Facebook, Twitter, blogs, websites, email, and electronic databases. While acknowledging the large volumes of online texts, to her credit, she is not letting herself be distracted by celebrating such volumes as some enthusiasts of quantification do, unrealistically believing that so-called “big data” could identify large social problems with easily obtained statistically significant findings. Instead she explores such texts as the networked products of the socio-technological nature of diverse online platforms. 

Niederer convincingly argues against treating social media as a mere alternative to one-way mass communications. For once, online texts rarely are single-authored and individually responded to. Their contents are the product of interactive collaborations, not only among individual contributors but also with diverse platforms that connect them. She argues that online content is platform-specific and accounts for their characteristics in terms of what she calls their “technicities.” To make sense of online communications, she insists, users and content analysts must come to terms with these technicities albeit in very different ways. She adopts two guiding observations that networked content analysis has to acknowledge. The first is that web content is increasingly accessed and organized through the use of different search engines and platforms. The second is that the technicity of communication can no longer be separated from the analysis of networked content. While users of digital media develop and employ their own competencies, she argues that content analysts of digital texts need to acquire platform specific tools and literacies to recognize the dimensionalities, processes, and networks that different platforms facilitate. For instance, search engines provide search results in ranked lists, Wikipedia cleans and organizes multi-authored texts with robots, and Twitter links texts through hashtags of up to 140 characters in length.   

A starter of networked content analysis is the use of computational methods to identify connections in large bodies of texts and generate visualizations of their multitudes, be they responses to tweets, references across documents, coinciding character strings, or links between websites. Such networks can be very complex and rarely lend themselves to simple narratives. For Niederer, visualizations of such networks can serve as navigational tools in conversations on how to proceed. To serve as such, analysts have to realize that such visualizations are the artifacts of the mapping algorithms that created them. To guide content analysts to answers to their research questions, these algorithms have to be compatible with the technicities that provided the analyzed texts. However, compatibility is not always demonstrable. For example, when the makeup of a platform is proprietary, as for Google’s search engines, the content analyst is limited to describe their technicities in terms of their results, by what they do. 

Niederer devotes one fascinating chapter on the technicity of Wikipedia, the collective, sometimes competitive editing of its entries, including by roaming editing robots that check on the grammar of its entries, eliminate inconsistencies, and most importantly, create hyperlinks among its entries as well as to outside literature. Users of the Wikipedia do not know who wrote an entry. The anonymity of authorship is part of Wikipedia’s philosophy of remaining open to changes which is also held against its use as a quotable authority. Yet, the editing history of each Wikipedia entry can be examined by any user. It provides a sense of how an entry developed and how conceptual controversies are played out. Its entries evidently are organized by Wikipedia’s technicity and their contents cannot be separated from its distinct operational features. 

Aware of diverse technicities leads Niederer to qualify the effects of new media content. For example, while political scientists have described Twitter as a channel for mobilizing political actions, for example, leading to the 2010s Arab Spring, a pro-democratic revolutionary wave of demonstrations and protests in the Arab world, Niederer is more careful in describing Twitter as an awareness system that offers its contributors a sense of where they are within a particular technicity. When a tweet goes viral, she suggests, its popularity may not be the only explanation. Equally and perhaps even more important is its fitting the technicity of the platform that networks it. This interpretation is justified when examining the ultimate consequences of the Arab spring. To make a political difference requires other forms of organization not cast in 140 characters.

Niederer exemplifies networked content analysis by various applications to the debate of global climate change. Unlike traditional content analyses which tend to focus on biases in the form of unequal frequency distributions, explainable in psychological or sociological terms, the choice of a public controversy is well-suited to demonstrate its capabilities as online texts on a common themes include unlike actors advancing opposing arguments. To contextualize her exemplifications, Niederer situates the history and stakeholders in the climate change debate in the context of what public controversies consist of.

In the network extracted from Wikipedia entries, the choice of “Global Warming” occupies a central node that is linked to numerous related issues, countries, economic issues, diseases, energy policies and scientific findings. Such a network can be looked at from numerous perspectives and be variously decomposed. 
Realizing that the Wikipedia is naturally biased towards consistency, controversies can become manifest in the editorial changes of disputed features. So, one way of charting the heat of a controversy is by measuring the frequency of editing changes in climate-related entries. While individual editors are known only by their code names, Niederer describes algorithms to depict how many contribute to which entries and at which time, giving a sense of where the controversy takes place and the speed in which it moves. While it is not difficult to separate individual editors from robots, evidently the content of interest is inextricably tied to Wikipedia’s technicity. 

Attending to a different technicity, Niederer also explores algorithms to identify networks within large bodies of tweets. Co-hashtag analysis resembles contingency analysis but reveals connections among clusters of similar tweets. The inferences she draws from these networks deal with issues of the vulnerability of different themes (areas in the world, phenomena, and actors) in the presence of threats (food, floods, diseases, and weather), issues of how skepticisms and conflicts migrate from one cluster to another, how clusters adapt over time. Evidently these conceptions are based on the texts used in tweets but inextricably linked to the nature of the Twitter platform that individuals learn to navigate and content analysts need to acknowledge to make sense of these data.

Sabine Niederer’s work responds to the changes that digital technology generally and diverse platforms for communicating among people in particular have introduced into our social world. Mass communication was a simple technicity. Contemporary communication is essentially networked. We create texts not just for particular addressees, but selectively rehash, redistribute, copy, and modify texts without being always cognizant what they do. The essence of online communication is no longer what is said but the networks we implicitly create, sustain, reawaken, or let go of. Networked content analysis begins to recognize the socio-technological infrastructure of our contemporary existence. It is a fascinating step into the future and well worth taking seriously and develop.     

###References
D. Stern. *The University of Iowa Tractatus Map.* (Iowa City: Iowa UP, 1996), http://tractatus.lib.uiowa.edu/.

L. Wittgenstein. *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus* (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co, 1922).