---
Pr-id: Networked Content Analysis: The Case of Climate Change
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 32
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 03
Article-title: acknowledgment of collaborative work
Article-status: accepted
Author: Sabine Niederer
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Acknowledgments of Collaborative Work

The research presented in this publication is a culmination of climate
change-related projects that I have worked on since 2007 with many
colleagues from the Digital Methods Initiative at the University of
Amsterdam and in collaboration with our research partners at Médialab
Sciences Po, Density Design at Politecnico di Milano, and Digital
Sociology at Goldsmith's University in London. This book has known a
previous life, in the form of a Ph.D. dissertation with the University
of Amsterdam, Department of Media Studies. The feedback and suggestions
provided by my supervisors, Prof. dr. José van Dijck and dr. Bernhard
Rieder, as well as the impeccable proof-reading and copy-editing by
Rachel O'Reilly, have proven invaluable.

At the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences I have worked at the
Institute of Network Cultures collaborating with many fellow
organizations on international research conferences such as the Society
of the Query (on search engine critique) and Video Vortex (on visual
media after YouTube), and on data literacy projects with the Citizen
Data Lab as part of Amsterdam Creative Industries Network. While it is
not easy to disentangle the many ideas and influences traversing these
years, I highly value to at least attempt to properly acknowledge these
collaborative efforts, which have led to the chapters of this book and
refer to the previously published work this has resulted in.

## Chapter 1: Introduction

The idea of formulating the research that has led to this book has its
origins in a project during the Digital Methods summer school of 2007,
the first annual summer program on methods and tools for social research
with the web at the University of Amsterdam, titled ‘New Objects of
Study.’ Here, I worked with Esther Weltevrede on our project titled
‘Issue Animals’, which I briefly discuss in this chapter. The idea of
the technicity of web content I publicly presented for the first time at
‘Enquiring Minds,’ a research seminar as part of *PICNIC08*, 24-26
September 2008, Amsterdam.

The discussion in this chapter of the work of Bruno Latour and Noortje
Marres has also been published in a paper co-authored with Ruurd
Priester. In that research project, we applied some of the methods
proposed in this book to an analysis of bottom-up initiatives in the
city of Amsterdam. The paper has been published in a special issue of
Computer Supported Cooperative Work.

S. Niederer and R. Priester, ‘Smart Citizens: Exploring the Tools of the
Urban Bottom-up Movement’, *Computer Supported Cooperative Work*, (2016)
25: 137-152, https://doi.orgf/10.1007/s10606-016-9249-6.

## Chapter 2: Foundations of Content Analysis

This chapter was written mostly during my time spent as a visiting
scholar at the Annenberg School for Communication, University of
Pennsylvania. Here I had the opportunity to work with scholars at the
core of Content Analysis and collaborate with the Iran Media Group there
on a study of Internet censorship, which was published by the Annenberg
School and included in the *Blackwell Companion to New Media Dynamics*.

R. Rogers, E. Weltevrede, S. Niederer, and E. Borra, ‘National Web
Studies: The case of Iran’, in J. Hartley, J. Burgess, & A. Bruns (eds.)
*Blackwell Companion to New Media Dynamics*, Oxford: Blackwell, 2013,
pp. 142-166.

## Chapter 3: Climate Debate Actors in Science and on the Web

A full version of this chapter in a previous form has been published in
the journal *Necsus* (2013). The chapter is a culmination of multiple
collaborative projects. The first is a scientometric analysis and
extended mapping of climate skeptics, which I conducted during the
Digital Methods summer school of 2008 in collaboration with Andrei
Mogoutov, developer and owner of ReseauLu, and Bram Nijhof (at the time
a student of the New Media & Digital Culture master’s program at the
University of Amsterdam). The first version of this study was published
on the online research platform www.mappingcontroversies.net, as part of
the EU 7th Framework project Macospol in 2009, with scientific
coordinator Bruno Latour.

My collaboration with the French climate journalist Denis Delbecq led to
the mapping of French climate skepticism, which resulted in a
co-authored online publication (2010). In 2011, I continued this
research with a mapping of Dutch climate skepticism. I have presented
this research at *Media in Transition 7* (MiT7) in Cambridge,
Massachusetts (May 2011), the *Media of Collective Intelligence* event
at the University of Siegen (November 2011) and the conference *Data
Traces: Big Data in the Context of Culture and Society* at the Institute
of Experimental Design and Media Cultures in Basel (July 2015).

D. Delbecq and S. Niederer, ‘Climatosceptiques et Climatologues, Quelle
Place Sur l’Internet?’, 2010,
http://effetsdeterre.fr/2010/04/12/climatosceptiques-quelle-place-sur-linternet/.

S. Niederer, ‘Climate Change Skeptics on the Web’, 2009,
https://web.archive.org/web/20140621023333/http://www.mappingcontroversies.net/Home/PlatformClimateChangeSkepticsScience.

S. Niederer, ‘Global Warming Is Not a Crisis! Studying Climate Change
Skepticism on the Web’, *Necsus* 3 (Spring, 2013):
http://www.necsus-ejms.org/global-warming-is-not-a-crisis-studying-climate-change-skepticism-on-the-web/.

## Chapter 4: Wikipedia as Socio-technical Utility for Networked Content Analysis

This chapter is based on research conducted at a Digital Methods Summer
School of 2009, with Richard Rogers, Zachary Deveraux, Bram Nijhof, and
Auke Touwslager, in which we compared the dependency of Wikipedia on
bots for editing, in the various language versions of Wikipedia. In
2010, a discussion of this research with my Ph.D. supervisor José van
Dijck led to the decision to develop this research further into a
co-authored paper. This paper was published in the journal *New Media &
Society* and reprinted in 2014 as part of the edited volume *Researching
Society Online*.

The research for this chapter has led to an interview about Wikipedia
with Nicholas Nova, which is published in his book *Wikipedia’s Miracle*
(and in the French edition *Le Miracle Wikipedia*).

I have presented various versions of this chapter at *Formatting
Utopia – from Paul Otlet to the Internet*, a conference at the Mundaneum
in Mons/Bergen in Belgium (November 2008), ATACD *Changing Cultures,
Cultures of Change* conference at the University of Barcelona (December
2009), as a *Brown Bag Lecture* at the Amsterdam University of Applied
Sciences (January 2010), at *Medien der Kollektiven Intelligenz* at the
University of Konstanz, at the Annenberg School for Communication in
Philadelphia (April 2011), at the *ReClaiming Participation* conference
in Zürich (May 2014) and at *Reading Wikipedia,* the Praemium Erasmianum
Conference at the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW)
in November of 2015.

S. Niederer, ‘Interview’, in N. Nova and F. Kaplan (eds) *Wikipedia’s
Miracle*, Lausanne: EPFL Press, 2016, pp. 53-61.

S. Niederer, ‘Entretien’, in N. Nova and F. Kaplan (eds) *Le Miracle
Wikipedia,* Lausanne: PPUR, 2016, pp. 51-61. (French edition)

S. Niederer and J. van Dijck, ‘Wisdom of the Crowd or Technicity of
Content? Wikipedia as a Sociotechnical System’, *New Media & Society*
12.8 (2010): 1368–1387.

S. Niederer and J. van Dijck, ‘Wisdom of the Crowd or Technicity of
Content? Wikipedia as a Sociotechnical System’, in M. David and P.
Milward (eds) *Researching Society Online*, London: Sage, 2014
(Reprint).

## Chapter 5: Mapping the Resonance of Climate Change Discourses in Twitter

This study was published in the online publication *Climaps: An Online
Issue-Atlas of Climate Change Adaptation* and featured in *Wired
Italia*. The United Nations tweeted the study’s climate vulnerability
world map after its publication in the *Climaps* atlas.

For the case studies in this chapter, which were conducted in data
sprints as part of the EU FP7 project Electronic Maps to Assist Public
Science (EMAPS), I have collaborated closely with researchers at the
Digital Methods Initiative, including Sophie Waterloo, Simeona Petkova,
Natalia Sanchez Quérubin, Liliana Bounegru, and Catalina Iorga. Erik
Borra and Bernhard Rieder are the developers of the tools used for this
analysis. The research team also consisted of information designers from
DensityDesign in Milan, including Carlo de Gaetano, Gabriele Colombo,
and Stefania Guerra.

After the data sprint, the descriptions of our various case studies,
which I worked on with various team members but especially Sophie
Waterloo and Gabriele Colombo, were compiled and expertly edited by
Natalia Sanchez Quérubin and Lilliana Bounegru for publication in the
online issue atlas *Climaps.eu*, which presents the issue stories and
issue maps of the EMAPS project. For this chapter, I have re-assembled
and subsequently rewritten the Climaps materials and our original
descriptions (co-authored with Sophie Waterloo and Gabriele Colombo) to
suit the focus of this book and aptly present the collaborative case
studies of mapping the climate debate with Twitter. I have presented the
research at the conference *Social Media and the Transformation of
Public Space,* at the Royal Netherlands Academy of the Arts and Sciences
(June 2014).

R. Battaglia, ‘Clima, Ecco la Mappa di Chi Litiga Sul Cambiamento
Climatico’, *Wired Italia*, 2014,
http://www.wired.it/attualita/politica/2014/12/15/emaps-come-mappare-disaccordo-clima/.

EMAPS, ‘Profiling Adaptation and Its Place In Climate Change Debates
With Twitter’, 2014,
http://climaps.eu/\#!/map/profiling-adaptation-and-its-place-in-climate-change-debates-with-twitter-I.

EMAPS, ‘Reading the State of Climate Change From the Web: Top Google
Results’, 2014,
http://climaps.eu/\#!/map/profiling-adaptation-and-its-place-in-climate-change-debates-with-twitter-ii.

EMAPS, ‘Who is Vulnerable According to Whom?’, 2014,
http://climaps.eu/\#!/map/who-is-vulnerable-according-to-whom.

@UNEnvironementUNEP, ‘This map compares 3 lists of countries ranked by
\#climeatechange vulnerability. Surprised? buff.ly/1tFvlZJ’, Twitter
post, 1 November 2014, 3:12 PM,
https://twitter.com/unep/status/528550060397957120.

## Chapter 6: Conclusions

In the conclusions, I mention three studies that I have worked on
collaboratively: *People’s Dashboard*, *The City as Interface*, and the
*Knowledge Mile Atlas*.

*The People’s Dashboard* was a project developed during the Digital
Methods Winter School of January 2015. Esther Weltevrede and I
facilitated the group, which included the following participants:
Evelien Christiaanse, Caio Domingues, Yvette Ducaneaux, Inte Gloerich,
Alex Harrison, Hendrik Lehmann, Gabriel Reis, Pavel Rodin, Jurij Smrke,
Janina Sommerlad. Erik Borra developed the plugin. Stefania Guerra and
Tommaso Renzini (Density Design) made the design.

*The City as Interface* was a project developed during the summer school
of 2015, in which we worked with subject matter expert Martijn de Waal,
author of the book *The City as Interface* (2014). The project team,
which I facilitated, had as participants Nataliya Tkachenko, Xinyang Xie
(Yang), Peta Mitchell, Maarten Groen, Adrian Bertoli, Khwezi Magwaza,
Naomi Bueno de Mesquita, Joe Shaw, Alexander van Someren, Tim Leunissen,
and Philip Schuette. Designers working with us on the project were
Michele Mauri and Donato Ricci.

The *Knowledge Mile Atlas* is an ongoing collaboration (2014-) with
information designers Gabriele Colombo, Michele Mauri, and Matteo Azzi
of Density Design and Calibro, and Carlo De Gaetano, Federica Bardelli,
Wouter Meys, Maarten Groen, Maarten Terpstra, and Matthijs ten Berge at
the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences, in which we analyze and
visualize the online presence and resonance of an urban area under
development. The area cuts through the city center of Amsterdam and
crosses many districts and neighborhood borders. We presented our
co-authored paper about the Knowledge Mile maps at the conference
*Hybrid City 3: Data to the People* (September 2015) at the University
of Athens. The paper was published in the conference proceedings.

*The People’s Dashboard* is described extensively on the wiki project
page: https://wiki.digitalmethods.net/Dmi/PeoplesDashboard. To install
the plugin, go to:
https://github.com/digitalmethodsinitiative/peoplesdashboard.

The wiki page for the project *The City as Interface* is:
https://wiki.digitalmethods.net/Dmi/TheCityAsInterface.

S. Niederer, G. Colombo, M. Mauri, and M. Azzi, ‘Street-Level City
Analytics: Mapping the Amsterdam Knowledge Mile,’ in *Hybrid City 3:
Data to the People*, Athens: University of Athens, 2015,
www.media.uoa.gr/hybridcity.

A previous version of this chapter has been published as:

S. Niederer (2018), ‘The Study of Networked Content: Five Considerations
for Digital Research in the Humanities, in Schiuma, G., Carlucci, D.
(eds.) *Big Data in the Arts and Humanities*, New York: Auerbach
Publications, p. 89-100. https://doi.org/10.1201/b19744
